---
title: Rotationally Symmetric Shapes
---

<script type='text/javascript' src='/js/rotsym.js' defer='defer'></script>

Some shapes have **rotational symmetry**. By a rotational symmetry,
I mean an angle that the shape can be rotated by to get the same shape
(we will make this more precise later).
For example, consider a
square. You can rotate it by four different angles to get the same shape.

<div id="ngon" class="illustration"></div>

More generally, a regular $n$-gon 
(a shape with $n$ sides of the same length and $n$ equal angles)
has $n$ rotational symmetries. 

What about a shape with infinitely many rotational symmetries?
That is, a shape which can be rotated by infinitely many distinct angles
to get the same shape.
There is a simple example of such a shape that shouldn't be too
difficult to think of, so I'll let you try and think of it yourself.

Now, if we want to find out what kinds of shapes have infinitely many
rotational symmetries, we have to make a few things precise:

- What do we mean by shape?
- What exactly is a rotational symmetry?

Before we get started, let me explain a bit about the format of this blog and
this post. For readers who don't get into this kind of thing often, there will
be explanations of notation and some ideas in boxes
<div class='well'>like this one</div>
If all this is old hat for you, skip those guys.

## Shape

It is a bit difficult to say what the defining characteristics of the intuitive
notion of a "shape" are. Here are some that seem reasonable to me:

1. It can be described by a collection of points in the plane
2. It shouldn't "go on forever", that is, I should be able to draw a box
  around it.
3. It shouldn't have any "discontinuities" or little holes in it.

That last point is the most vague of the three and probably the hardest
to intuitively justify. We'll likely return to it later on. <!-- TODO: This -->

Let's fix some notation. First off, $\mathbb{R}^2$ refers to the collection
of points $(x, y)$, where $x$ and $y$ are real numbers.
Think of it as specifying a point in the plane, as below.

<div id='point-in-plane' class='illustration'></div>

<div class='well aside'>
  If $A$ and $B$ are sets (of numbers, say) people say $A$ is a subset of $B$
  if every thing in $A$ is in $B$. (Aside: sets are conventionally given capital
  letters as names). We write $A \subseteq B$ to indicate that $A$ is
  a subset of $B$.

  Note that if $A$ is a subset of $B$ then it need not be the case that $B$ contains
  something that $A$ doesn't. That is we can have both $A = B$ and
  $A \subseteq B$, since if $A = B$, then every thing in $A$ is in $B$.

  Two final bits of notation: 

  - If $a$ and $b$ are real numbers, then $[a, b]$ denotes the collection of
    real numbers between (and including) $a$ and $b$.
  - If $A$ and $B$ (note the capital letters) are sets, then $A \times B$
    denotes the set of pairs $(x, y)$ where $x$ is something in $A$ and
    $y$ is something in $B$.
</div>

Let's try and translate our intuitive properties of shapes into precise ones.

#### Definition:
1. A **shape** is a nonempty set of points $S$ (that is, $S \subseteq \mathbb{R}^2$) such that
2. for some real numbers $x_{\text{left}}, x_{\text{right}}, y_{\text{low}}$
   and $y_{\text{high}}$, we have that 
   $S \subseteq [x_{\text{left}}, x_{\text{right}}] \times [y_{\text{low}}, y_{\text{high}}]$

<div class='well'>
  Let us stop to think about what 2 says for a moment. What is
  $[x_{\text{left}}, x_{\text{right}}] \times [y_{\text{low}}, y_{\text{high}}]$?
  It is the set of points $(x, y)$ with $x$ between $x_{\text{left}}$ and $x_{\text{right}}$
  and with $y$ between $y_{\text{low}}$ and $y_{\text{high}}$. Such a set of
  points is simply a rectangle,
  oo it really is a faitful rendering of our condition that we must be able to
  draw a box around a shape.
</div>

The only remaining thing to translate is 3. 
This is something which is tough to give an intuitive justification for.

# Rotational symmetry

# Pudding

With our definitions in hand, we can begin to attack the problem.

Let $S$ be a shape with infinitely many rotational symmetries.
What do we know about $S$? Well, it's nonempty, so there
is some point $p$ in $S$. We also know that our shape actually contains
infinitely many points since we can rotate $p$ by infinitely many angles
to get more points in $S$. Let's say $A$ is the set of points in $S$ that
$p$ gets sent to under some rotational symmetry.

One thing to notice about $A$ is that every point in $A$ lies on the same
circle centered at the origin (i.e., centered at the point $(0,0)$).
This is because $p$ lies on some circle and by rotating $p$, we stay on
that circle.

<div id="pathanim" class="illustration"></div>

<div id='graph'></div>
